.. _ml-reviews-2023:

==================
GenAI Outlook 2023
==================

2023 Mar 24

A lot of people are talking about how generative AI is a gamechanger for
the technical writing industry. This post summarizes what's going on.

----------------
Potential threat
----------------

The threat is simple: `generative
AI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_artificial_intelligence>`__
has the potential to reduce the demand for technical writers because
it’s getting pretty good at our job.

Take `ChatGPT <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ChatGPT>`__ for example.
You ask it questions in a familiar chat UI and it responds with answers
that have been synthesized from a variety of sources. A lot of these
answers are actually relevant and helpful. It can respond in text,
`code <https://twitter.com/emollick/status/1637961568238411776>`__, and
`image <https://twitter.com/emollick/status/1639094707795165184>`__.

If it’s any consolation, the generative AI community does not have a
vendetta against technical writers in particular. It is potentially a
`general purpose technology that may affect most
jobs <https://twitter.com/emollick/status/1637790373689917441>`__.

ChatGPT’s take
==============

This is how ChatGPT (GPT-4) responded to the following question: “What
parts of technical writing are most likely to be automated by ChatGPT?”

   As an AI language model, ChatGPT can potentially automate several
   aspects of technical writing, making the process more efficient and
   less time-consuming for human writers. Some areas that are most
   likely to be automated include:

   Basic content generation: ChatGPT can generate paragraphs or sections
   based on given topics or outlines, providing a starting point for
   technical writers. This can speed up the content creation process and
   help maintain consistency in writing.

   Data analysis and interpretation: AI can analyze large datasets and
   generate summaries, trends, or insights that can be incorporated into
   technical documents.

   Formatting and template creation: AI can automatically apply
   formatting and styling rules to documents, ensuring they adhere to
   specific guidelines or templates.

   Grammar and spell-checking: ChatGPT can identify and correct
   grammatical errors, spelling mistakes, and other language
   inconsistencies, leading to higher-quality content.

   Terminology consistency: AI can help maintain the use of consistent
   terminology and phrases throughout a document, reducing confusion for
   readers.

   Content summarization: ChatGPT can create concise summaries or
   abstracts of longer, more complex documents, making them more
   accessible to a wider audience.

   Content translation: AI language models can translate technical
   content into multiple languages, helping to disseminate information
   globally.

   Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) generation: AI can identify common
   questions related to a topic and generate clear, concise answers.

   Metadata generation: AI can automatically generate metadata for
   technical documents, such as keywords, tags, and descriptions,
   improving searchability and discoverability.

   Plagiarism detection: AI can identify potential plagiarism cases in
   technical writing and suggest alternative content to maintain
   originality.

   However, it is important to note that ChatGPT and similar AI models
   are not perfect and may still require human supervision, especially
   in highly specialized or complex fields. Human writers will continue
   to play a critical role in the technical writing process, ensuring
   accuracy, relevance, and context in the content produced by AI.

Potential productivity boon
===========================

Long story short, I can imagine a future where generative AI does not
replace technical writers but is instead just a powerful new tool that
increases our productivity. There are lots of possibilities in this
regard, but I will focus on only one for now.

Take the age-old “never enough time to document everything” problem for
example. Once I become proficient in the technical domain I’m
documenting, I often realize how little of that domain I will ever be
able to document. There simply is never enough time to cover everything.
Generative AI has the potentially to dramatically speed up the research
and content creation process, so it has the potential to help me finally
make progress on the “never enough time” problem. Generative AI doesn’t
really seem like a threat to me in this context for a few reasons:

-  It’s work that I never previously had time to get to anyways.
-  It may still be more efficient to have a technical writer in the mix
   than to try to automate everything completely. After all, as xkcd so
   brilliantly summarized in `Automation <https://m.xkcd.com/1319/>`__,
   the funny thing about automation is that you do it because you think
   it will save you time when in reality it’s often the opposite.
-  You may still need someone who is proficient in technical writing and
   the technical domain in order to effectively orchestrate the
   generative AI.

The jury is still out
=====================

I caution against taking either side at this point. It’s simply too soon
to know yet.

Summary of this post from ChatGPT
=================================

Here is how ChatGPT summarized this post:

ChatGPT (GPT-4):

   Generative AI, like ChatGPT, is seen as both a potential threat and a
   productivity boon to technical writers. While it could reduce the
   demand for writers as AI becomes increasingly proficient at their
   tasks, it could also be a valuable tool to enhance productivity by
   speeding up research and content creation. In this context, AI could
   help address the “never enough time” problem in documentation.
   However, technical writers might still be needed to effectively
   orchestrate generative AI. It is too early to determine the exact
   impact of generative AI on the field of technical writing.

Here was the prompt I provided:

   Please summarize the following text in 100 words or less: ``<content>``

Where ``<content>`` was the blog post you just read.
